docs: Add reference materials for managing WSL instances (#1368)
canonical/ubuntu-pro-for-wsl: docs/reference/instance_configuration.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Reference information on configuring WSL instances."
---

# WSL instance configuration

> This page includes reference materials on configuring your WSL instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure instances of Ubuntu on WSL using different methods.
```

More direct.

> ## Instance configuration
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think we can delete, as it essentially duplicates the top-level heading.

Reviewer: OK. We can come back to that in future.

> There are a number of different ways to configure instances of Ubuntu on WSL, each with a different scope and use-case. Depending on the configuration method, you can affect all Ubuntu instances, only instances of a specific Ubuntu distribution, or an individual instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each configuration method has a different scope and use-case. Depending on the method, you may affect all Ubuntu instances or only one Ubuntu instance.
```

We can remove the first part if the heading above is removed, as it duplicates the first sentence.

I think we can simplify the second part the all or one, as I think it's somewhat confusing to mention instances of a distribution at this point, and it might be more approproiate to expand in the cloud init section, for example.

| Method                            | Scope                                                      | Location                                                                                   |
| --------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| [WSL Settings](ref::wsl-settings) | General settings that apply to all WSL instances           | Graphical application named `WSL Settings` pre-installed with WSL                          |
| [`.wslconfig`](ref::.wslconfig)   | General settings that apply to all WSL instances           | `%UserProfile%\.wslconfig`, in the Windows file system                                     |
| [`wsl.config`](ref::wsl.config)   | Settings for a specific WSL instance only                  | `/etc/wsl.conf`, while inside a WSL instance                                               |

> | [Cloud-init](ref::cloud-init)     | Ubuntu provisioning settings                               | `<Distro Name>.userdata` files in `%UserProfile%\.cloud-init\`, in the Windows file system |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Cloud-init](ref::cloud-init)     | Ubuntu provisioning settings for instances of a named distribution                               | `<Distro Name>.userdata` files in `%UserProfile%\.cloud-init\`, in the Windows file system |
```

Did we agree to make this change in the previous pass? I think it's more in line with the other Scopes and it's more descriptive.

For changes to apply, you may need to run `wsl --shutdown` from PowerShell to shut down the WSL 2 VM and then restart your WSL instance.

> [Read more about `.wslconfig`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config#wslconfig)

(ref::wsl.config)=

### wsl.config

Each unique instance can be configured using the `wsl.config` file located at `/etc/wsl.config` within a given WSL instance. Settings stored in this file are only applied to that instance.

To modify this file, enter the target WSL instance, and then open `/etc/wsl.config` in a text editor of your choice with admin permissions using `sudo`. For example, `sudo nano /etc/wsl.config`.

The `wsl.config` file can be used to configure instance-specific settings such as systemd support, automount settings, network settings, interoperability settings, and user settings.

```{warning}
Certain settings in `.wslconfig` are incompatible with specific Ubuntu features. For example, we generally recommend keeping systemd and interoperability enabled.

> For additional information on how features like systemd and interoperability affect the functionality of Ubuntu on WSL, please see the explanation page [comparing WSL versions](explanation::wsl-version)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information on how features like systemd and interoperability affect the functionality of Ubuntu on WSL, please see the explanation page [comparing WSL versions](explanation::wsl-version).
```

```

> To apply changes made to a `wsl.config` file, you need to restart your WSL instances by running `wsl --shutdown` or `wsl --terminate <Instance Name>` from PowerShell. Confirm that the instance is no longer running with `wsl --list --running`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply changes made to a `wsl.config` file, you need to restart your WSL instances by running `wsl --shutdown` or `wsl --terminate <Instance Name>` from PowerShell. Confirm that the instance is no longer running with `wsl --list --running`.
```

> [Read more about `wsl.config`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config#wslconf)

(ref::cloud-init)=

### Cloud-init

Cloud-init can be used to automatically set up instances of Ubuntu on WSL.

> With cloud-init, you can pre-configure instances of a named Ubuntu distribution, such as creating users, pre-installing software, or running arbitrary commands on initial startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With cloud-init, you can pre-configure instances of a named Ubuntu distribution, such as by creating users, pre-installing software, or running arbitrary commands on initial startup.
```

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Reference information on configuring WSL instances."
---

# WSL instance configuration

This page includes reference materials on the basics of managing and configuring your WSL instances.

> ## Basic instance management

Author: In that case, I'll go ahead and remove the section and update the page with the removal in mind.

| Method                            | Scope                                              | Location                                                                            |
| --------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Ubuntu Pro for WSL](ref::up4w)   | Ubuntu Pro attachment management between instances | [Graphical application ](howto::up4w)                                               |
| [WSL Settings](ref::wsl-settings) | General settings that apply to all of WSL          | Graphical application named `WSL Settings`                                          |
| [`.wslconfig`](ref::.wslconfig)   | General settings that apply to all of WSL          | `%UserProfile%\.wslconfig`, outside of a WSL instance                               |
| [`wsl.config`](ref::wsl.config)   | Settings for specific WSL instance only            | `/etc/wsl.conf`, while inside a WSL instance                                        |

> | [Cloud-init](ref::cloud-init)     | Ubuntu provisioning settings                       | `.userdata` files located at `\UserProfile%\.cloud-init\` outside of a WSL instance |

Author: For consistency with one of your earlier suggestions, I'll also switch the wording at the end to "in the Windows file system".

For changes to apply, you may need to run `wsl --shutdown` from PowerShell to shut down the WSL 2 VM and then restart your WSL instance.

> [Read more about `.wslconfig`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config#wslconfig)

(ref::wsl.config)=

### wsl.config

Local, per instance configuration can be done with the `wsl.config` file located at `/etc/wsl.config` within a given WSL instance. Settings stored in this file are only applied to the instance that the `wsl.config` file belongs to.

To modify this file, enter the target WSL instance, and then open `/etc/wsl.config` in a text editor of your choice with admin permissions using `sudo`. For example, `sudo nano /etc/wsl.config`.

The `wsl.config` file can be used to configure instance-specific settings such as systemd support, automount settings, network settings, interoperability settings, and user settings.

```{warning}
Certain settings in `.wslconfig` are incompatible with certain Ubuntu features. For instance, we recommend keeping systemd and interoperability enabled.

> For additional information on how features like systemd and interoperability as well as WSL versions may affect Ubuntu, please see the explanation page [comparing WSL versions](explanation::wsl-version)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information on how features like systemd and interoperability affect the functionality of Ubuntu on WSL, please see the explanation page [comparing WSL versions](explanation::wsl-version)
```

I would keep the text supporting the link relevant to the preceding text. If they follow the link they will find additional information.

```

To apply changes made to a `wsl.config` file, you need to restart your WSL instances by running `wsl --shutdown` or `wsl --terminate <Instance Name>` from PowerShell. Confirm that the instance is no longer running with `wsl --list --running`

> [Read more about `wsl.config`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config#wslconf)

(ref::cloud-init)=

### Cloud-init

> Cloud-init is a cross-platform tool for provisioning cloud instances and can be optionally used to automatically set up instances of Ubuntu on WSL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cloud-init can be used to automatically set up instances of Ubuntu on WSL.
```

Keep it simple.

> With cloud-init, you can pre-configure things specific to a new Ubuntu instance, such as creating users, pre-installing software, or running arbitrary commands on initial startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With cloud-init, you can pre-configure instances of a named Ubuntu distribution, such as creating users, pre-installing software, or running arbitrary commands on initial startup.
```

```{important}

> Cloud-init is only available with WSL 2 with systemd and interoperability enabled. For additional information, please reference the explanation page on how [WSL versions affect Ubuntu](explanation::wsl-version).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cloud-init is only available when systemd and interoperability is enabled. For additional information, please reference the explanation page on how [WSL versions affect Ubuntu](explanation::wsl-version).
```

```

```{note}

> Cloud-init is only applied once, during the first startup of a WSL instance. Subsequent edits to the `.user-data` file will have no effect unless forcibly applied.

Reviewer: > Cloud-init is only applied once, during the first startup of a WSL instance. Subsequent edits to the `.user-data` file will have no effect unless forcibly applied.

Something for the future, perhaps, but if Landscape supplies a cloud-init file, it takes priority over any overlapping user-defined cloud-init file: https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/datasources/wsl.html#user-data-configuration

This page will be a good place to mention that fact when the Landscape features get out of beta but we probably don't need to do it now.

Reviewer: Agreed.

> ```{note}
> Cloud-init is only applied once, during the first startup of a WSL instance. Subsequent edits to the `.user-data` file will have no effect unless forcibly applied.
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{note}
Cloud-init is only applied once, during the first startup of a WSL instance. Subsequent edits to the `.user-data` file will have no effect unless forcibly applied.
```

Note should appear after the mention of the `.user-data` file in this section, not before.

> To use cloud-init, place your cloud-init files in `%UserProfile%\.cloud-init\` of the user home directory (create this folder if it does not exist), and name your cloud-init file `<Distro Name>.user-data`, replacing `<Distro Name>` with the name of the distribution that you are making.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use cloud-init, place your cloud-init files in `%UserProfile%\.cloud-init\` (create this folder if it does not exist), and name your cloud-init file `<Distro Name>.user-data`, replacing `<Distro Name>` with the name of the distribution that you want to configure.
```

> Afterwards, use the text editor of your choice to edit the `.user-data` file you just created, adding your desired cloud-init profile.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Don't think this is necessary.

> Finally, install Ubuntu as you would normally, cloud-init should apply automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, install that distribution as you would normally, and the cloud-init configuration should apply automatically.
```
